Explicit disclosure Ledger API documentation (#215)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.7.0/docs/app-dev/explicit-contract-disclosure.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. _explicit-contract-disclosure:

Explicit Contract Disclosure (Experimental)
###########################################

Canton 2.7 introduces explicit contract disclosure as a feature

> that allows you to seamlessly delegate contract read rights to a non-stakeholder using off-ledger data distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that allows you to seamlessly delegate contract read rights to a non-stakeholder by sending the essential metadata off-ledger.
```
maybe ? anw now that I read all the section it makes sense what it means. I just thought that data distribution is already a mechanism when I read the sentence for the first time.

Author: I am afraid of too much repetition with this essential metadata

> that allows you to seamlessly delegate contract read rights to a non-stakeholder using off-ledger data distribution.

Author: Answered below

        quotationProducer: Party
        offeredAssetCid: ContractId Stock
      where
        signatory seller

        choice Offer_Accept: ()
          with
            priceQuotationCid: ContractId PriceQuotation
            buyer: Party
            buyerIou: ContractId IOU
          controller buyer
          do
            priceQuotation <- exercise
              priceQuotationCid PriceQuotation_Fetch with
                fetcher = buyer
            asset <- fetch offeredAssetCid

            -- Assert the quotation issuer and asset name
            priceQuotation.issuer === quotationProducer
            priceQuotation.stockName === asset.stockName

            _ <- exercise
              offeredAssetCid Stock_Transfer with
                newOwner = buyer

            _ <- exercise
              buyerIou IOU_Transfer with target = seller, amount = priceQuotation.value
            pure ()

We model the setup of the trade between the parties using a snippet of :ref:`Daml Script <daml-script>` below.

::

      let stockName = "Daml"

      offerCid <- submit seller do
        createCmd Offer with
          seller = seller
          quotationProducer = stockExchange

>           offeredAssetCid = stockCid

Reviewer 2: `stockCid` hasn't been define yet. In fact it's define below

      stockCid <- submit stockExchange do
        createCmd Stock with
          issuer = stockExchange
          owner = seller
          stockName = stockName

      priceQuotationCid <- submit stockExchange do
        createCmd PriceQuotation with
          issuer = stockExchange
          stockName = stockName
          value = 3

      buyerIouCid <- submit bank do
        createCmd IOU with
          issuer = bank
          owner = buyer
          value = 10

> Settling the trade on-ledger implies that **Buyer** exercises ``Offer_Accept``

Author: Valid point, added ;)

use to acquire **Seller** 's stock.

Below we outline the Daml templates used to model the above-mentioned trade.

::

    template IOU
      with
        issuer: Party
        owner: Party
        value: Int
      where
        signatory issuer
        observer owner

        choice IOU_Transfer: ()
          with
            target: Party
            amount: Int
          controller owner
          do
            -- Check that the transferred amount is not higher than the current IOU value
            assert (value >= amount)
            create this with issuer = issuer, owner = target, value = amount
            -- No need to create a new IOU for owner if the full value is transferred
            if value == amount then pure ()
            else void $ create this with issuer = issuer, owner = owner, value = value - amount
            pure ()

    template Stock
      with
        issuer: Party
        owner: Party
        stockName: Text
      where
        signatory issuer
        observer owner

        choice Stock_Transfer: ()
          with
            newOwner: Party
          controller owner
          do
            create this with owner = newOwner
            pure ()

>     template PriceQuotation

Reviewer 3: This example requires a one line comment as to how the `PriceQuotation` is intended to be used. I.e. while active it witnesses the "current fair price" and can be used as input to [market orders](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/marketorder.asp)

      with
        issuer: Party
        stockName: Text
        value: Int
      where
        signatory issuer

>         nonconsuming choice PriceQuotation_Fetch: PriceQuotation

Reviewer 3: We need to explain why we need a fetch choice, it may not be obvious to the reader why sheer existence of the contract is not enough here.

Author: Done: 9a06734ef78274c1efea24732a1e7ba9c3cdc23c

          with fetcher: Party
          controller fetcher
          do pure this

    template Offer
      with
        seller: Party
        quotationProducer: Party
        offeredAssetCid: ContractId Stock
      where
        signatory seller

        choice Offer_Accept: ()
          with
            priceQuotationCid: ContractId PriceQuotation
            buyer: Party
            buyerIou: ContractId IOU
          controller buyer
          do
            priceQuotation <- exercise
              priceQuotationCid PriceQuotation_Fetch with
                fetcher = buyer
            asset <- fetch offeredAssetCid

            -- Assert the quotation issuer and asset name
            priceQuotation.issuer === quotationProducer
            priceQuotation.stockName === asset.stockName

            _ <- exercise
              offeredAssetCid Stock_Transfer with
                newOwner = buyer

>             _ <- exercise

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            -- Purchase the stock at the currently published fair price.
            _ <- exercise
```

.. note:: The Ledger API uses the disclosed contracts attached to command submissions
  for resolving contract and key activeness lookups during command interpretation.
  This means that usage of a disclosed contract effectively bypasses the visibility restriction
  of the submitting party's over the respective contract.
  However, the authorization restrictions of the Daml model still apply:
  the submitted command still needs to be well authorized (i.e. the actors
  need to be properly authorized to execute the action -
  as described in :ref:`Privacy Through Authorization <da-model-privacy-authorization>`).

.. _stakeholder-contract-share:

How do stakeholders disclose contracts to submitters?
-----------------------------------------------------

The disclosed contract's details can be fetched by the contract's stakeholder from the contract's
associated :ref:`CreatedEvent <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.CreatedEvent>`,
which can be read from the Ledger API via the active contracts and transactions queries
(see :ref:`Reading from the ledger <reading-from-the-ledger>`).

The stakeholder can then share the disclosed contract details to the submitter off-ledger (i.e. outside of Daml)

> by conventional means (e.g. SFTP, e-mail etc.). A :ref:`DisclosedContract <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.DisclosedContract>` can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by conventional means (e.g. HTTPS, SFTP, e-mail etc.). A :ref:`DisclosedContract <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.DisclosedContract>` can
```

  and cannot be used as disclosed contracts.

.. _submitter-disclosed-contract:

Attaching a disclosed contract to a command submission
------------------------------------------------------

A disclosed contract can be attached as part of the ``Command``'s :ref:`disclosed_contracts <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.Commands.disclosed_contracts>`
and requires the following fields (see :ref:`DisclosedContract <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.DisclosedContract>` for content details) to be populated from
the original `CreatedEvent` (see above):

- **template_id** - The contract's template id.
- **contract_id** - The contract id.
- **arguments** - The contract's create arguments. This field is a protobuf ``oneof``
  and it allows either passing the contract's create arguments typed (as ``create_arguments``)
  or as a byte array (as ``create_arguments_blob``).
  Generally, clients should use the ``create_arguments_blob`` for convenience since they can be received as such
  from the stakeholder off-ledger (see above).
- **metadata** - The contract metadata. This field can be populated as received from the stakeholder (see below).

> Settling the stock trade with explicit disclosure

Reviewer 3: We are not settling the trade here, we are in fact just trading so
```suggestion
Trading the stock with explicit disclosure
```

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. _explicit-contract-disclosure:

Explicit Contract Disclosure (Experimental)
###########################################

Canton 2.7 introduces explicit contract disclosure as a feature
that allows you to seamlessly delegate contract read rights to a non-stakeholder using off-ledger data distribution.

Toggle the ``explicit-disclosure-unsafe`` flag in the participant configuration as shown below
to use disclosed contracts in command submission by means of explicit contract disclosure.

> .. note::  This feature is **experimental** and **must** not be used in production environments.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. note::  This feature is **experimental** and **must not** be used in production environments.
```

::

    participants {
        participant {
            ledger-api.explicit-disclosure-unsafe = true
        }
    }

Contract Read Delegation
------------------------

Contract read delegation allows a party to acquire read rights during
command submission over a contract of which it is neither a stakeholder nor an informee.

As an example application where read delegation could be used,

> let's consider a simplified trade between two parties.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
consider a simplified trade between two parties.
```

In this example, party **Seller** owns a unit of Digital Asset ``Stock`` issued by the **StockExchange** party.
As the issuer of the stock, **StockExchange** also publishes the stock's ``PriceQuotation`` as public data,
which can be used for settling trades at correct market value. The **Seller** announces its offer

> to sell his stock publicly by creating an ``Offer`` contract that can be exercised by anyone that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to sell his stock publicly by creating an ``Offer`` contract that can be exercised by anyone who
```

can pay the correct market value in terms of ``IOU`` units.

On the other side, party **Buyer** owns an ``IOU`` with 10 monetary units, which it wants to

> use to acquire **Seller** 's stock.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
use to acquire **Seller**'s stock.
```

        nonconsuming choice PriceQuotation_Fetch: PriceQuotation
          with fetcher: Party
          controller fetcher
          do pure this

    template Offer
      with
        seller: Party
        quotationProducer: Party
        offeredAssetCid: ContractId Stock
      where
        signatory seller

        choice Offer_Accept: ()
          with
            priceQuotationCid: ContractId PriceQuotation
            buyer: Party
            buyerIou: ContractId IOU
          controller buyer
          do
            priceQuotation <- exercise
              priceQuotationCid PriceQuotation_Fetch with
                fetcher = buyer
            asset <- fetch offeredAssetCid

            -- Assert the quotation issuer and asset name
            priceQuotation.issuer === quotationProducer
            priceQuotation.stockName === asset.stockName

            _ <- exercise
              offeredAssetCid Stock_Transfer with
                newOwner = buyer

            -- Purchase the stock at the currently published fair price.
            _ <- exercise
              buyerIou IOU_Transfer with target = seller, amount = priceQuotation.value
            pure ()

> We model the setup of the trade between the parties using a snippet of :ref:`Daml Script <daml-script>` below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following snippet of :ref:`Daml Script <daml-script>` models the setup of the trade between the parties.
```

::

      let stockName = "Daml"

      stockCid <- submit stockExchange do
        createCmd Stock with
          issuer = stockExchange
          owner = seller
          stockName = stockName

      offerCid <- submit seller do
        createCmd Offer with
          seller = seller
          quotationProducer = stockExchange
          offeredAssetCid = stockCid

      priceQuotationCid <- submit stockExchange do
        createCmd PriceQuotation with
          issuer = stockExchange
          stockName = stockName
          value = 3

      buyerIouCid <- submit bank do
        createCmd IOU with
          issuer = bank
          owner = buyer
          value = 10

Settling the trade on-ledger implies that **Buyer** exercises ``Offer_Accept``
on the ``offerCid`` contract.
But how can **Buyer** exercise a choice on a contract
on which it is neither a stakeholder nor a prior informee?
Furthermore, the same question applies with regard to **Buyer**'s visibility over the
``stockCid`` and ``priceQuotationCid`` contracts.

If **Buyer** plainly exercises the choice like in the snippet below,

> his submission will fail with an error citing missing visibility rights over the involved contracts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the submission will fail with an error citing missing visibility rights over the involved contracts.
```

::

      -- Command fails with missing visibility over the contracts for buyer
      _ <- submit buyer do
        exerciseCmd offerCid Offer_Accept with priceQuotationCid = priceQuotationCid, buyer = buyer, buyerIou = buyerIouCid

Read delegation using explicit contract disclosure
``````````````````````````````````````````````````

With the introduction of explicit contract disclosure, **Buyer** can accept the offer from **Seller**
without having seen the involved contracts on the ledger before. This is possible if the contracts' stakeholders
decide to :ref:`disclose <stakeholder-contract-share>` their contracts to any party desiring to execute such a trade.
**Buyer** can attach the disclosed contracts to the command submission

> that's exercising ``Offer_Accept`` on **Seller** 's ``offerCid``, thus bypassing the visibility restriction

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that's exercising ``Offer_Accept`` on **Seller**'s ``offerCid``, thus bypassing the visibility restriction
```

> that's exercising ``Offer_Accept`` on **Seller** 's ``offerCid``, thus bypassing the visibility restriction

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that is exercising ``Offer_Accept`` on **Seller**'s ``offerCid``, thus bypassing the visibility restriction
```

Author: Duplicate of the previous one

> that he had over the contracts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
over the contracts.
```

.. note:: The Ledger API uses the disclosed contracts attached to command submissions
  for resolving contract and key activeness lookups during command interpretation.
  This means that usage of a disclosed contract effectively bypasses the visibility restriction

>   of the submitting party's over the respective contract.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  of the submitting party over the respective contract.
```

  However, the authorization restrictions of the Daml model still apply:

>   the submitted command still needs to be well authorized (i.e. the actors

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  the submitted command still needs to be well authorized. The actors
```

>   need to be properly authorized to execute the action -

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  need to be properly authorized to execute the action,
```

>   as described in :ref:`Privacy Through Authorization <da-model-privacy-authorization>`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  as described in :ref:`Privacy Through Authorization <da-model-privacy-authorization>`.
```

.. _stakeholder-contract-share:

How do stakeholders disclose contracts to submitters?
-----------------------------------------------------

The disclosed contract's details can be fetched by the contract's stakeholder from the contract's
associated :ref:`CreatedEvent <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.CreatedEvent>`,
which can be read from the Ledger API via the active contracts and transactions queries
(see :ref:`Reading from the ledger <reading-from-the-ledger>`).

> The stakeholder can then share the disclosed contract details to the submitter off-ledger (i.e. outside of Daml)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The stakeholder can then share the disclosed contract details to the submitter off-ledger (outside of Daml)
```

> by conventional means (e.g. HTTPS, SFTP, e-mail etc.). A :ref:`DisclosedContract <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.DisclosedContract>` can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
by conventional means, such as HTTPS, SFTP, or e-mail. A :ref:`DisclosedContract <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.DisclosedContract>` can
```

.. _submitter-disclosed-contract:

Attaching a disclosed contract to a command submission
------------------------------------------------------

A disclosed contract can be attached as part of the ``Command``'s :ref:`disclosed_contracts <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.Commands.disclosed_contracts>`
and requires the following fields (see :ref:`DisclosedContract <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.DisclosedContract>` for content details) to be populated from
the original `CreatedEvent` (see above):

- **template_id** - The contract's template id.
- **contract_id** - The contract id.
- **arguments** - The contract's create arguments. This field is a protobuf ``oneof``
  and it allows either passing the contract's create arguments typed (as ``create_arguments``)
  or as a byte array (as ``create_arguments_blob``).
  Generally, clients should use the ``create_arguments_blob`` for convenience since they can be received as such
  from the stakeholder off-ledger (see above).
- **metadata** - The contract metadata. This field can be populated as received from the stakeholder (see below).

Trading the stock with explicit disclosure
-------------------------------------------------

> Going back to our example, **Buyer** does not have visibility over the ``stockCid``, ``priceQuotationCid`` and ``offerCid`` contracts,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the example above, **Buyer** does not have visibility over the ``stockCid``, ``priceQuotationCid`` and ``offerCid`` contracts,
```

> hence he needs to provide them as disclosed contracts in the command submission exercising ``Offer_Accept``. In order to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
so **Buyer** must provide them as disclosed contracts in the command submission exercising ``Offer_Accept``. In order to
```

do so, the contracts' stakeholders must fetch them from the ledger and make them available to the **Buyer**.

.. note:: Daml Script support for explicit disclosure is currently not implemented.

>   For exemplification purposes, we model the last steps of this example using raw gRPC queries.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  The last steps of the example are modeled using raw gRPC queries.
```

The contracts' stakeholders issue fetch queries to the Ledger API for retrieving

> the associated contract payloads. For simplicity, all parties reside on participant ``participant``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the associated contract payloads. For simplicity in the example, all parties reside on participant ``participant``
```

with the Ledger API running on port ``5031``.

::

  -- StockExchange fetches the Stock contract referenced by stockCid from the ledger by querying the Ledger API
  -- (here we are using the GetTransactions query)

>   grpcurl -plaintext -d '{"ledgerId":"participant","begin":{"absolute":"0000000000000000"},"end":{"boundary":"LEDGER_END"},"filter":{"filtersByParty":{"StockExchange::12206edc46b86d9ea5f75407fa04720ea005f253ca736fb047a8c25839edf2fbb8fa":{"inclusive":{"templateIds":[{"packageId":"5811603b1342a2a791fd69aff08d710f67bf652f3e7129dd51f69bc01bb30f19","moduleName":"StockExchange","entityName":"Stock"}]}}}},"verbose":true}' localhost:5031 com.daml.ledger.api.v1.TransactionService/GetTransactions

Reviewer 5: UUIDs don't make for nice reading. One alternative would be to redirect output to `.json` files then re-combine them with `jq` before piping into the next `grpcurl` command. The downside of this approach is that most readers will not be familiar with advanced `jq` hacking.

**Buyer** receives these contracts from the stakeholders and adapts them to disclosed contracts (as described in :ref:`the previous section <submitter-disclosed-contract>`)
in a command submission that executes ``Offer_Accept`` on the ``offerCid``. The resulting gRPC command submission, which succeeds, is

> showcased below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
shown below.
```
